---
layout: post
title: How I de-googled my personal devices
subtitle: Switching out of Google products and services has been easier than expected
image: /posts/img/degoogle/fairphone6.png
image-license:
  url: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Fairphone_6#/media/File:FP6-GREEN-COMMERCIAL-WALLPAPER-HERO.png
  text: "Image: Fairphone (CC-BY-SA 4.0)"
show-avatar: false
mathjax: false
tags: [smartphone, android]
---

This post is a recap of my experience migrating to a Google-free environment.
This transition is part of a broader change of habits I made in recent times.
It is not just a matter of putting more focus on privacy, but also of escaping
_[enshittified](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enshittification)_ products, and
creating some distance from (and not be a customer of) companies whose
political and social stances have become more and more questionable.

As part of this change, for instance, I stopped using Amazon altogether one
year ago, and I started paying a lot more attention to use products and
services that are free from questionable political ties.[^11]

Beyond political and social concerns, _enshittification_ practices have become
more and more frustrating to me personally. No longer passively enduring these
changes but rather ditching these products and migrating to alternatives, even
if sometimes more expensive or less mature, gives a much better feeling of
regaining a customer role rather than being myself the product.

Adding to that, more and more pieces of legislation are being pushed in
different countries to put in place mechanisms enabling large-scale
surveillance. [Chat control](https://fightchatcontrol.eu/) is one of the most
discussed proposals at the moment, but it only adds to many previous steps that
have been eroding privacy and freedom of expression in recent times. Some
successful acts of legislation in the opposite direction, such as
[GDPR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_Data_Protection_Regulation), are
important milestones but do not feel anywhere near enough. In light of this,
allowing companies to get a hold of unnecessary personal information becomes
more and more dangerous, as that data can be sold (legally or illegally) to bad
faith private entities or hostile government actors.

The [DeGoogle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DeGoogle) movement is not new but
it gained significant popularity in the last couple years, likely in connection
with recent political developments and the political stances taken not just by
Google but also other large IT corporations.

# Background

I have been using Android for almost fifteen years, since when I migrated from
my last PDA[^1] to my first smartphone. My previous Android devices have been
two iterations of the Nexus phone and a Pixel 5.

I am used to custom ROMs and fiddling with system customization, as for a long
time in the past I used
[CyanogenMod](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CyanogenMod) (later
[LineageOS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LineageOS)). At the time I had three
main motivating factors for using custom ROMs: having access to system features
not yet part of AOSP or OEM Android,[^2] getting faster and longer update
support,[^3] and avoiding OEM bloatware.

However, as Android matured, I later settled for vanilla Google Android on
Nexus (and later Pixel) devices, as it offered the features I needed with
little bloatware compared to other OEMs. Update and support has remained short
and underwhelming, but for the rest I found little to no appeal in other
Android OEMs.

I was however aware of the trade-off that came with using Google products, and
the terrible privacy practices that came with it. In the last few years I came
to like less and less the policies adopted by Google,[^5] both in terms of
products and general stance, and on top of that I decided that the privacy
trade-off was no longer acceptable.[^4] For these reason, I decided to migrate
out of the Google ecosystem entirely.

# All starts with the email

The obvious first step has been moving out of Google products. I started using
the Google ecosystem with Gmail, and ironically email was the first step on
the way out as well. Gmail is the only Google service I truly depended on, as
for all other Google products I either only had minor and not strictly
necessary use cases, or no use at all.

For a privacy-oriented focus, I opted to make Proton Mail my new main email
account. I have already had a free Proton account for some time as a secondary
email, as I have been planning this transition for a couple years already,[^8]
so I switched to a paid plan[^6] and migrated all my data from Gmail.

The plan includes end-to-end encrypted cloud storage and will allow me to also
get rid of my current cloud storage subscription,[^7] so the effective cost of
this transition, even without accounting for the privacy benefits, is much
lower than the label price.

## Ecosystem vs single-purpose

While Proton has a strong privacy-focused brand, the choice of email provider
is not automatic and arguments could be made about it. One multi-faced aspect
is that Proton is no longer just an email provider, but it now offers a cloud
suite including file storage, VPN, LLMs,[^9] wallet, and now a small but slowly
growing office suite.

There would be reasons to prefer a single-purpose focused email provider over
a wannabe cloud ecosystem, but in my case some other Proton products happen to
fulfill my use cases, so this ends up being an advantage for me.

The could storage is not particularly appealing over competitors in terms of
available storage, pricing, speed, and software. The lack of a viable Linux
client is a big negative for me, but the recent introduction of an SDK will
hopefully fill that gap in the future. The lack of a fast and robust
bidirectional synchronization is also limiting.

In my use case, however, I routinely use only a small set of data, while the
bulk of data is old items that I do not need to edit and that I rarely access.
So I can move the bulk of rarely used data to Proton, without really needing a
desktop client nor a mount point for it, and keep the small but frequently used
data on Dropbox, which allows me to switch to a lower tier Dropbox subscription
due to the now much smaller size requirement.

The office suite is also useful to me, as I have very limited use cases where a
Google Docs replacement is handy and saves me from the need for a separate
solution.[^10] The VPN is also handy, it is not an essential tool but I want to
have one at hand for technical reasons, and this saves me the need to get it
from a separate provider.

Other products in the Proton ecosystem, like wallets and LLM/AI, are not really
useful to me.

# Choice of phone

I decided to get a new smartphone, which is a rare event[^12] and usually
requires going through many considerations. Switching to iPhone is not an
option, as it implies exchanging one corporate ecosystem for another.[^20] I
decided to get a [Fairphone 6](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fairphone_6), for
a few different reasons.

[Fairphone](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fairphone) is an EU-based company
that manufactures devices with great lifespan and repairability. It also has a
strong focus on sustainability, which is in line with my own values. Fairphone
also partners with [Murena](https://murena.com/) to offer a Google-free variant
of their phones out of the box.

The choice of operating system was one out of several options.
[GrapheneOS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GrapheneOS) is arguably the
[safest](https://web.archive.org/web/20251009134134/https://eylenburg.github.io/android_comparison.htm)
mobile operating system available at the moment. However it only supports Pixel
devices for the foreseeable future, making it a hard pass for me as I am not
willing to buy more Google products, not even if just for the hardware. While
GrapheneOS's superior hardening is very interesting, it is an overkill for my
personal threat model and not necessary to achieve my narrower goal of getting
rid of Google products and services.

In the past I used [LineageOS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LineageOS) and
appreciated it for its simplicity and freedom from bloat. A de-googled
LineageOS installation could therefore be a candidate.
[/e/os](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki//e/_(operating_system)) is a relatively
new system, based on LineageOS, and I decided to give it a chance.

I am aware that prioritising usability, as Murena (the company developing
/e/os) does, implies some compromises that could be avoided by going for a more
hard-core option like GrapheneOS. I also do not blindly trust the company and
look critically ahead to how it will continue its mission in the future. I see
this migration primarily as an experiment that might require corrections (all
the way up to switching to a different Android ROM).

# Switching to /e/os

Compared to other Android distributions, /e/os focuses on privacy and
usability. For Fairphone buyers, this also includes a two years software
warranty.[^13] For instance it ships built-in tracker protection,[^15] and it
anonymizes some services that still rely on interactions with Google.

[MicroG](https://github.com/microg/GmsCore/wiki), a free and open source
reimplementation of Google Play Services, is pre-installed and configured with
reasonable defaults, the App Lounge (/e/os's app store) allows seamless access
to both F-Droid and Google Play Store (either through log-in with a Google
account or in an anonymous way) and allows to install apps from there without
having to install the Play Store app itself.

I am on the knowledgeable and experienced side of users, so having to configure
everything from scratch would not be an issue, but I find it interesting to see
a company putting effort into creating a privacy-focused alternative without
the hassles that would normally come with it, making privacy accessible to
everyone, not just seasoned users.

Speaking of smoothening the user experience, Murena also offers a platform for
cloud synchronization, which is something missing from most other alternatives
(for good or bad). I have decided to go without cloud for now, as I want to
avoid creating more ties with cloud providers, including Murena itself, and see
what the experience is like without any cloud integration.

The migration has been incredibly smooth, much less problematic than I
expected.[^14] All my apps worked just fine, even digital identity and banking
apps, which are the ones with the most potential to be fussy. Only one manual
settings adjustment was required to get some apps to always work when invoked
from links in the browser, I had to manually select in the app settings which
app link domains to enable (simply allowing those apps to open links was not
enough).

# Caveats

While the switch has been surprisingly smooth, there are some unpolished or
underwhelming corners that I hit pretty quickly.

## Software

The first one is of personal taste (_de gustibus non est disputandum_ and all),
but I personally am not a fan of the iPhone-like UI in the default
Murena-developed Bliss launcher.[^17] Thankfully, however, /e/os is not tied to
its default launcher, and for a Pixel escapee like me
[Lawnchair](https://github.com/LawnchairLauncher/lawnchair) provides the
familiar clean and tidy UI experience with the advantage of a much greater deal
of customizability compared to Pixel. Lawnchair is just one among several high
quality options for open source Android launchers, so on this aspect there is
ample room for choice.

Most stock apps are very bare-bone and some of them are borderline unusable. As
an example, at the time of writing, the gallery ignores
[exif](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exif) metadata (scrambling the
chronological order of imported images) and does not even have a scrollbar,
making it painful to navigate if you have more than just a few images. Some
software functions feel also less calibrated compared to Pixel (for instance
the automatic display rotation being too trigger-happy) and remember me of
Google phones from many generations ago.

Thankfully there are excellent open source and privacy-friendly projects to
piece the puzzle, like the [Aves](https://github.com/deckerst/aves) image
gallery. I replaced Google Keep by moving my recipes to Proton Docs[^19] and
using [Fossify Notes](https://github.com/FossifyOrg/Notes) for grocery lists
and similar.

The built-in /e/os camera app also reminds me of older Android versions, but as
an image processing professional I appreciate the large amount of settings,
customization, and manual toggles it provides. I never liked the trend of
Google to remove manual options and settings from the camera app.

One big absence is Google Pay, which cannot be used through MicroG. This
prevents from using any wallets and contactless payment services relying on it.
I personally do not use contactless payments on the phone, as they serve no
practical purpose (nor give any real benefit nor convenience) compared to
directly using a contactless bank card, while on the downside they would
require sharing my whole transaction history with a third party (like Google)
for no good reason.

This however does not mean it is impossible to use contactless payments without
Google Pay. Some bank apps, and also some neobanks or banking intermediaries,
implement their own NFC payment mechanism instead of relying on Google Pay,
therefore allowing to execute contactless payments from Google-free phones.

## Privacy

/e/os [ships
MagicEarth](https://web.archive.org/web/20250906064834/https://doc.e.foundation/maps#how-magicearth-is-added-into-eos)
as its preinstalled maps app, which is not open source. It is considered one of
the best alternatives to Google Maps for navigation, and since navigation is my
biggest use case it might be a good enough tool. Nonetheless, and regardless of
the privacy statement, the lack of openness is a turn down.[^21]

One also need to be careful about which advanced features one enables, as that
is one of the aspects where privacy compromises might pop up. An example is the
text-to-speech, that [currently relies on
OpenAI](https://web.archive.org/web/20250922012725/https://community.e.foundation/t/voice-to-text-feature-using-open-ai/70509).

/e/os also ships some pre-installed system apps (browser, maps, notes, etc.)
that cannot be uninstalled. None of these seem to be invasive, but I still see
this as a downside compared to cleaner systems like GrapheneOS.

Another aspect to keep in mind is that custom ROMs (like LineageOS and /e/os)
and OEMs (including Fairphone) can be slower in delivering Android updates in
full.

A detailed analysis of shortcomings in /e/os and Fairphone can be found in [an
official statement](https://web.archive.org/web/20251006124000/https://discuss.grapheneos.org/d/24134-devices-lacking-standard-privacysecurity-patches-and-protections-arent-private)
from GrapheneOS. In a nutshell, GrapheneOS is presently the best option by
far when it comes to hardening and safety. If one is willing to buy a Google
Pixel phone to run it, which I am no longer willing to do.

## Hardware

The most annoying usability complaints I personally found are hardware-related,
however. I personally do not like the fingerprint reader on the power button,
as it makes unnecessarily hard to turn the screen on and off without
accidentally unlocking the device (even when disabling the always-on
fingerprint unlocking). I will have to get used to turning the display off by
double-tapping the top edge of the screen (which is not particularly
practical). I wish I could also double-tap to turn it on, but always-on display
is not supported on /e/os,[^18] whose absence can be felt if one is used to it.

I also dislike the placement of the up-down volume buttons on the opposite side
of the device, being placed too low. It is easy to accidentally click the
volume down button while pressing the power button on the other side, and I
have already taken way too many unintentional screenshots because of it. While
I can understand the choice of bundling the fingerprint reader with the power
button to simplify the hardware design, the poor placement of the volume
buttons is hard to justify, especially for a sixth generation product.

I will also miss the convenience of wireless charging, and will have to get
used again to fiddle with cables (or find a good charging dock), as I do not
think I will be willing to deal with the bulkiness of an external wireless
charge adapter.[^16] Wireless charging is missing by design, as it is not a
power-efficient solution. Even with a wireless charger on the lower end of
efficiency, though, the amount of wasted power would be fairly limited in
absolute terms, and I could be willing to trade it for the convenience.

# Is it really Google-free?

In the end, the straight answer is no. Not entirely. While it is possible to
set up a truly Google-free Android derivative (a stock GrapheneOS is a good
example), the truth is that many apps have dependencies on Google Play
Services, and will break without them.

Applications such as digital identity, banking, and government-related services
are becoming more and more important in most societies, approaching the
borderline indispensable. Therefore a truly Google-free device (as in,
completely free from Google Play Services) would be functionally broken in this
context. And even the current approaches to tame Google Play Services, such as
using MicroG or by running Google apps in sandboxed mode, feel brittle in terms
of long-term viability, as Google could take action to break such solutions,
and there would be no one that could realistically stop them.[^22]

My personal goal for this migration has been to get rid of first-hand
dependency from Google services, and limiting interaction with Google APIs to
the strict necessary and only for the apps I truly need. Nonetheless,
reflecting on this gives a worrisome perspective of how how deeply society has
become entangled with private actors like Google and other large IT firms, that
have built for themselves a position which is becoming harder and harder to
extricate from functional services in modern society, and would require some
amount of re-thinking in terms of long term strategy and national sovereignty.

# Footnotes
{:footnotes}

[^1]: I have been using PDAs long before the smartphone era.

[^2]: Examples of deal-breaking feature for me at the time were tethering and
      WiFi hotspots.

[^3]: At the time, Android OEMs could take months if not years to deliver major
      Android updates, and support could be as short as a couple years or less.

[^4]: Adding to that, the experience on Pixel 5 and 6 (I had the latter for
      some time as a work phone) has been personally underwhelming, with the
      feeling of being overpriced mid-range devices with outdated hardware, and
      I found the later Pixel iterations not attractive in terms of design.

[^5]: And of several other IT firms.

[^6]: As it is well-known, if you are not paying for a service, you are the
      product, and I am happy to pay even for a product like email that is
      often assumed to be a "free" service, if this gives me a guarantee on the
      quality of the service and full ownership of my data.

[^7]: Dropbox, to which I add client-side encryption using
      [gocryptfs](https://github.com/rfjakob/gocryptfs).

[^8]: I have been postponing this for at least a couple years, partially due to
      being busy, partially to overestimating the amount of effort and
      complexity than the transition would require.

[^9]: Though, to be fair, who is not offering LLMs these days...

[^10]: My documents are either simple enough to be plain text, or complex
       enough to be LaTeX, there is generally no middle ground. Google Docs is
       only for quick and unimportant things, especially if I need to share
       them with other people on a pinch.

[^11]: To complete the tour of the FAANG knights of apocalypse: When it comes
       to Microsoft products I am already in a good spot, as I only use Linux
       systems on my machines. I also do not use Apple nor Meta products, and I
       do not watch TV shows (so no Netflix or similar).

[^12]: I tend to hold on phones for 5-6 years, until they become unusable.

[^13]: The /e/os variant of Fairphone 6 is identical to the Fairphone OS-based
       one but slightly more expensive. I take the price difference as a
       donation to Murena plus the benefit of a two years software warranty.
       Even though I do not give much importance to the latter, it might still
       be valuable for less experienced users.

[^14]: Having set up some Huawei phones in the past, I am aware of how many
       apps can break without Google Play Services.

[^15]: Which I would previously get through DuckDuckGo, which would however
       prevent me from using a VPN at the same time.

[^16]: Or maybe I could look into buying a wireless charging coil and
       controller and develop my own hardware solution. Sounds like an
       interesting potential fun project.

[^17]: I understand how Murena might be trying to appeal to users that want to
       escape from the Apple ecosystems, not just from Google.

[^18]: Fairphone OS supports always-on display, but on the Fairphone 6 it is
       known, at the time of writing, to significantly increase battery drain.

[^19]: I am not even sure why I was storing them on Google Keep to begin
       with, as it is far from being the best tool for the job.

[^20]: Additionally, I never particularly liked the iOS interface and
       experience.

[^21]: Google Maps has some useful features, such as satellite imagery and
       StreetView, that I sometimes use. But I mostly use them from the PC, and
       if I happened to need them on the phone I can always load the Google
       Maps web version in the browser. Another popular use case for Google
       Maps is to search for establishments and their opening hours, but at
       least the latter proved to be unreliable more often than not for my use
       cases.

[^22]: Recent anti-trust investigations in both the EU and US are promising,
       especially the EU ones, but I feel like regulators are still trying to
       catch up with the very basics of digital markets.
